---
layout: post
title: Advice on Choosing an Undergraduate College
description: 
category: articles
blog: true
date: 2017-03-29
tags: college, university, undergraduate, swarthmore, oxford, penn, columbia, harvard, stanford, pomona, yale, princeton, williams, amherst, cornell
---

Recently, I've been approached by family friends and others on advice regarding undergraduate college admissions. I spent a pretty significant amount of time researching colleges in high school. I have also been fairly reflective of my three years so far in terms of evaluating whether I made the right choice by coming to Swarthmore. Furthermore, my year abroad at Oxford has allowed me to contrast two very different schools: the small liberal arts college versus the large research institution.

Luckily for me, my parents gave me essentially complete independence when it came to the college process. I acknowledge this is a luxury, especially in the Indian-American culture. Since most of the people who have sought out my advice are also Indian-American, a lot of what I have to say is in response to the culture's narrow viewpoint on college. However, I believe most (if not all) of what I have to say can be applied to anyone. 

Furthermore, do note that I did make the decision to go to a liberal arts college, which is kind of an anomaly in regards to most college-bound seniors and definitely an anomaly among Indian-American students. Therefore, I am probably biased towards small, liberal arts colleges. Also, note that I talk about my personal experience as well as some of my friends. When I talk about my friends, I have changed colleges to preserve anonymity. Lastly, this is not an essay meant to help you get admissions into college. I got into less than half of the schools I applied to. Rather, it's advice on how to select schools to apply to and how to decide between multiple acceptances.

The main question I like to ask every student is why they want to go to college. Frankly, I don't think this question is often asked enough. Usually, the students are taken aback and give me some response that is clearly not genuine. Rather it's what they believe their parents and college admissions officers want to hear.

For a lot of the people that surrounded me in high school (including myself), the real answer is that it was always expected of us. It wasn't a choice. It's like asking us why we want to go to high school, middle school, or elementary school. We didn't go because of some romanticized view of learning. Rather, we went because that's what we were taught to view as important and the necessary path to follow in the pursuit of achieving the 'good life'. 

Then, there's the second answer. No one will every say this answer, but it certainly is in everyone's head: prestige. Parents want to be able to say "My daughter went to Harvard." I didn't apply to Harvard so I don't know if Harvard has a "Why Harvard?" essay in its application. If it does, it should remove it because the real answer for almost every single applicant is "Because It's Harvard". But, the cunning applicants are able to weave a 200-word narrative that somehow differentiates it from other elite schools.

Prestige is the elephant in the room that people don't want to talk about. People often want to go to the most prestigious school for the sake of prestige and bragging rights alone. And, I think all people associated with the applicant want to share the bragging rights. I have a friend who was essentially coerced into picking Yale over Pomona by people they had not talked to in years. Yet, once their acceptances became public, it all of a sudden became everyone's business to give their two cents. No one was interested in the merits of Pomona. Rather, "it's Yale". I do think that these people had good intentions. But good intentions does not justify influence, especially when it's unsolicited. To take an extreme example, just because Hitler believed himself to have good intentions does not mean that his ideas were correct. In other words, if people give you advice on college without you asking for it, don't listen to them because they probably only care about prestige. I hope that you reading this essay means you are seeking out my advice rather than me giving it out without your consent.  

What I hope to do in this essay is remove the appeal associated with prestige. I'm not advocating for it to be ignored completely. But, I want to show other considerations that should be viewed more importantly. That being said, I believe everyone is vulnerable to prestige. I will be the first one to admit that I am. While Swarthmore was not the most prestigious of schools I was accepted into, I believed it was the best on some of the factors I'll talk about below. But, there were certain schools I was wait-listed at that had I received an acceptance from them, I would have taken it over Swarthmore purely because of the prestige. The fact of the matter is that I can lay out an argument for prestige, have you agree with all my points, and acknowledge that prestige shouldn't be the most important factor. Yet, by tomorrow, you will revert back to the prestige mindset.

The best example that I like to give why prestige isn't everything is the University of Pennsylvania. Obviously, it's one of the best schools in the nation. While all elite schools are more or less competitive, Penn is notorious for its cutthroat culture. With rampant grade deflation, students are hypercompetitive because they succeed by beating others. It's essentially a zero-sum game (one wonders whether the culture of Wharton has seeped into the whole university's).

In the past four years, Penn has had [twelve students commit suicide](http://www.phillyvoice.com/12th-suicide-less-4-years-hits-upenn-report-says/). This should be shocking. Mental health is increasingly becoming a problem at universities everywhere. But twelve suicides in four years should give every single applicant pause. In the 2009-2010 academic year, Cornell University had six students commit suicide. There are clearly systematic problems with these schools. I fear that people ignore these statistics because of inflated senses of self: the view, "Oh, this won't happen to me." But, how many of the students that did commit suicide though that they would when they matriculated? Unfortunately, mental health is an important issue people underestimate unless they or a close one suffer from it.

Obviously, Penn and Cornell are great schools. It's not as if suicide is the norm. One must simply go to Wikipedia and see all the notable alumni that demonstrate that these universities produce world-famous graduates. There are tons of great people and groups there. But, I believe the severity of suicide as well as the fact that it is a trend rather than an isolated incident should be of concern. I'm not saying that one shouldn't go to those schools. Rather, troubling statistics like them should be appropriately weighed because they currently aren't.

I will concede that the problem may not completely be a toxic culture but also bad mental health resources. Additionally, apparently some elite universities will kick out students for a semester if their mental health is bad enough. That way, it'll a) give them time to recover from the toxic environment and b) if anything happens when they're away, the university doesn't have to take responsibility. After all, elite schools are essentially public relations powerhouses nowadays. Thus, similar schools' statistics may be deflated and not representative. Regardless, that just shows that other schools may also have a problem, not that Penn and Cornell don't.

So really, ask why you want to really go to college. For me, I eventually picked that I wanted to go for the in-classroom education. I viewed college as four years of intense, formal study that I would never be able to do again. Thus, it's no surprise that I then picked a small, liberal arts college. For others, the answer is getting their dream job, having the most opportunities, making a lot of money, etc. I am not going to argue that it's more 'noble' to chase an education rather than money. College is an expensive decision and practical concerns should be just as (if not more) important than romanticized ambitions. But I think everyone's answer is different, as it should be. College is a personal decision.

There is also probably not just one reason you want to go. In fact, there should be hopefully be multiple. But I want to demonstrate why the answer to this question is important. Say that what I most value is getting a good job right out of college. I'd especially like to make a lot of money at the start, perhaps to pay off college loans. If I were in these shoes, the better decision to me would probably have been to go the University of Texas at Austin rather than Swarthmore. They have a top CS program and everyone has heard of them. It is significantly easier to land a job at a tech company with a CS degree from there rather than Swarthmore. I mean, how many tech recruiters have heard of Swarthmore? The amount of tech companies that will actively recruit UT students is incredibly high (and not just because Austin is becoming a tech hub). It's one of the top public institutions in the country and a produces a large amount of qualified students. There are probably less than five tech companies that actively recruit at Swarthmore. So if my main goal in life is to become a software engineer at Facebook or Google, then UT should be the pick over Swarthmore. Same if I want to get a job at a "Big 4" accounting firm or one of the top management consultancy firms. On the other hand, one of the main reasons I picked Swarthmore was it's utter disdain for pre-professionalism. In fact, I viewed it negatively and thus penalized any school where that was a large aspect of the culture.

A common fallacy that people make when evaluating colleges is how they evaluate its graduates. It seems relatively straightforward: the best colleges should produce the best graduates. Thus, I should look at the colleges that have the highest paid graduates, most Rhodes scholars, most Fortune 500 CEOs, etc. The problem with these measures is that each university has a different incoming student body with varying levels of strength. It might not be that Stanford helps people become Fortune 500 CEOs. It might just be that they recruit a higher percentage of entrepreneurial students which increases the chance that they have future Fortune 500 CEOs. If those students went to UT Austin, would they have still become Fortune 500 CEOs? Imagine if Amherst replaced its admission staff with the Rhodes admissions staff. Wouldn't we expect Amherst to have a higher percentage of Rhodes scholars since they are pre-selecting for them? The point I'm trying to make is that elite universities are not necessarily the ones helping students the most. Rather, the top students may just disproportionately pick the elite universities (which causes a cycle that increases the inequality).

Let's look at public secondary education as an analogy. Compare the rich suburban high school to the inner-city public school. The suburban high school probably has very high-achieving students who get high standardized test scores and go to prestigious universities. The inner-city public school probably has a high dropout rate. But, I don't think you can say that the teachers at the inner-city school are worse than the suburban high school. Rather, the suburban school is better off because its students have certain privileges. They have less non-academic worries because inner-city students might have to also work just to put food on the table. Suburban kids are probably more likely to get expensive tutors if they fall behind in school or need help on standardized tests. The teachers may be better at the inner-city students, but just because the students are so disadvantaged, they don't reach the level of success of their suburban counterparts. In fact, it would be significantly easier for the inner-city teachers to go to the suburban school rather than the other way around.

Consider the time of matriculation as point A and the time of graduation point B. Too many people are overemphasize point B while under-emphasizing the difference between point A and point B, i.e. the growth. Imagine if college decisions were completely random: that is, everyone gets randomly assigned a college. What would the 'hierarchy' look like? It would definitely be similar because of lasting effects of prestige. But, I think we can say a priori that the gaps would be much smaller.

Another mistake that people make is conflating research prowess with good education. "Columbia has the world-renowned professors, so they're the best place to go to because I'll learn the most." First of all, a professor is not a teacher. A professor is a researcher. They are hired to do research at the university and that is what they are incentivized to do. Teaching is an afterthought for many. A Nobel Prize winner will not be teaching Introduction to Biology. They might teach an upper-level undergraduate class, but even that is not common. 

Furthermore, just because you have a lot of knowledge in the field does not mean you are a good teacher. I have a more advanced mathematics background than most elementary school teachers. Who would be better at teaching six year olds math? Clearly the elementary school teacher. It is not about how well you know the material. It is about how well can you communicate with your intended audience. 

For instance, Oxford is definitely a computer science powerhouse and has some of the leading faculty worldwide. In terms of undergraduate teaching though, the Swarthmore faculty is clearly better. In fact, Swarthmore professors [publish papers](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0743731517300114) based on curriculum design. They came to Swarthmore to teach, not to conduct research. As a result, we don't expect them to be famous researchers because that's not where there priorities lie. Some Oxford professors will often stumble through explanations and advise students to look over the material on their own time afterwards. (Interestingly enough, this might have the effect that you become a better student since you have to learn the material on your own.) Regardless, what is clear is that research prowess should not be considered any type of correlate the for quality of in-classroom education. It is only applicable to those considering graduate school or doing research at the undergraduate level.

A case where my argument falters is for the absolute cream of the crop. For example, consider the student who represented the USA in the International Math Olympiad. If they are choosing between MIT and Swarthmore, they should almost certainly go to MIT. They probably prefer a professor who gives you unreasonably hard problem sets with little assistance than the slower, easier approach you would get at Swarthmore. On the other hand, Swarthmore is great for math students like me, [who did not come in as very experienced mathematicians](/rethinking-secondary-mathematics-education). 

One piece of advice that I try to emphasize is to not get too fixated on one college. Admissions can very much be a crapshoot. Stanford's admissions director came out and said that they could have had a completely new incoming class that would probably been smarter than the one they admitted. Now while the cynic can say this was purely a way of increasing the number of applications (and therefore increasing prestige), I do think it contains a degree of truth. There are just so many qualified applicants that there is a nontrivial degree of luck involved. This is not to say that it's complete luck. There are clearly students who deserve to get in and who don't deserve to get in. But, even the best students may have a 90% chance of getting in some places (which means a 10% chance of rejection)!. I know of two Harvard undergrads, one of which didn't get into Swarthmore and the other one Duke. The problem is, once people get their decisions, they are labeled into the binary admit/reject. 

A legal loophole allowed students to view their admissions file. I viewed mine at Swarthmore and saw that I wasn't a sure bet at all. I was on the edge until one admissions officer gave me the green light and then the others followed. But, now I'm officially classified as accepted despite the fact I maybe had a 50% (completely arbitrary number) chance of getting in. Consider the Harvard undergrad who maybe had a 90% chance of getting into Swarthmore, but is now labeled as a Swarthmore reject. Maybe the admissions officer reviewing their application had a bad day. Maybe their interests weren't aligned with the school's. Maybe it was just a coin toss. The fact of the matter is that accept/reject decisions are not necessarily indicative of one's ability because you lose a lot of information once you project onto a binary decision.

Furthermore, it's becoming harder and harder to get into college. Within the next year or two, Swarthmore's admission rate will be twice as low as it was during the year I applied. While that does not necessarily mean it's exactly twice as hard, it is definitely harder to get in. There are many reasons behind this, many times revolving around ED decisions and high yield rates. But, another reason is that college is becoming more accessible to people of all backgrounds. Pretty much all colleges now accept women. Financial aid is becoming more generous and often without the need to pay them back. Colleges want to achieve racial diversity. This is obviously incredible for the state of tertiary education in the United States. But, the corollary is that it broadens the applicant pool. Someone who went to Princeton or Williams in the early twentieth century was probably a rich, white male. In one sense, it was harder to be a woman and go to Princeton then because your acceptance rate would be 0%. But, the difference is that the option was never really there. Now the option is there, but the option is there for everyone else as well. Which means you are competing against a much stronger pool of applicants. And because the rate of people getting access to such an education is much higher than the rate of increase in student population at the university, it is harder and harder to get into an elite school.

If I have come across as above prestige, I will be the first one to point out that I'm not. In fact, while Swarthmore is not well known among tech companies, it has a reputation among academic circles and graduate school admissions. I knew that going to graduate school was very likely for me, and I believed that Swarthmore had a well-earned reputation for sending qualified students there. To me, that prestige was more important than impressing the random passerby. Furthermore, it would be naive to assume that no sense of prestige was part of my decision to study abroad at Oxford.

I think prestige is useful and in fact necessary in determining what types of school one should apply to and what should aim for. But, there comes a time when people become hyperaware of this and start defining themselves in terms of where they get accepted or rejected.

College is not an end, but rather a means to the next 80% of your life. I don't expect 17 year olds to know exactly what they want to do in life. I most certainty don't exactly what I want to do. But, I believe it's possible to construct a sense of your values and figure out what colleges most align with those.

I may be wrong on some points. In fact, I most certainly am. Thus, take everything with a grain of salt. Read my arguments and understand them. Critique and rebut them. I know I consulted a lot of people when I was thinking about schools, and I recommend that you do too. But with more and more people recently asking me for advice, I thought I'd make what I've learned through the process publicly available. 

A lot of people will say that "everything will work out". I always thought that as just survivorship bias. But, three years into college, I do really think it's true. And, I'm saying this as someone who got rejected from half of the schools they applied to. I wouldn't have done anything differently in high school just to try to increase my chances of getting in some places.

Who knows, I might have different things to say in five years when I'm a broke liberal arts college graduate. But until then, I think I can say that Swarthmore was the best decision for me. And it was only because I stopped focusing on prestige.

