---
layout: post
title: Reflections on a Year Abroad
description: 
category: articles
blog: true
date: 2017-08-07
tags: [study abroad, England, Oxford, immigration, immigrant]
---

Last May, I impulsively decided to study abroad in England for a whole year. I never even truly considered doing so until a week before I had to make my decision. Thankfully, I pushed myself outside of my comfort zone and went for it. Below is a scattering array of reflections of the whole experience.

At my college were a cohort of study abroad students, most of them from America. Given that we were in similar situations, we bonded quickly - we could talk about our previous years in college, funny British words, and all the political drama that defined the past academic year.

I eventually became cognizant of retracting into my bubble of comfort. What is the point of studying abroad if all you do is talk with Americans about American things? I made more of a conscious effort to interact with British students. It was extremely rewarding for I developed an incredible friend group over there.

This made me realize how easy it is to fall back into a community where you have so many shared experiences. Growing up, I remember being frustrated at how my parents (who immigrated from India to America) would only have Indian friends. And, it wasn't just my parents. I saw this in the Indian-American community as a whole. I understood it was difficult to branch out, but I felt that doing so was definitely feasible and rewarding. My year abroad made me realize just how difficult it is for people born in other countries to do so and how much of an effort one has to put on a daily basis.

Furthermore, the transition from the United States to the United Kingdom is one of the easiest transitions possible. Language barriers are one of the central obstacles of going to a new country, and I experienced very little of that (besides, of course, the funny British words). I can't imagine what it would be like for people immigrating from India to America.

Born and raised in America, I never felt like I could empathize with immigrants. And if I can't as a second-generation American, how should I expect those whose families have been in the country for generations? It's easy to make normative statements about how immigrants should act, but the year abroad made me realize that everything was infinitely more complex when you actually live it. Unfortunately, many of these obstacles are difficult to explain. The great philosopher Thomas Nagel advanced the famous argument that we could never understand what it is like to be a bat unless we were actually a bat. I believe one can make a similar claim about the immigrant experience.

While I attempted to sell Swarthmore as the perfect place in [this post](/advice-on-choosing-an-undergraduate-college), the reality that it has its flaws just like any institution. After a while, it can get overwhelming, and I left last year with many frustrations. This past year abroad made me realize all the great things at Swarthmore that I take for granted. In fact, that was probably a decisive reason for writing that post. Furthermore, some of what I took for granted at Swarthmore are the little things such as Internet reliability, free performances, and a better laundry system. But, you don't realize how important the little things are until you don't have any of them.

My first term in England was plagued with sickness. Of the nine weeks (it was a trimester system), I was ill for eight. Everything suffered as a result, ranging from academics to running to social activities. I always thought I would heal within 48 hours and never exerted the effort to actively try to get better. It made for a miserable term. The new environment didn't help either. Unfortunately, good health is one of the things that everyone takes for granted until they are sick. It's a lot better to take the ibuprofen when you're feeling a little down rather than go on prescription medicine weeks later. Everyone always realizes this when they are sick but then reverts back to their old mindset once they are better. Good health is often a necessary condition for a positive experience so we really should spend more time being proactive about illnesses.

Right outside my college was a food truck run by two Japanese women. The first few times, I only heard one of the women speak in fluent Japanese with her coworker (daughter, potentially?). Her accent was extremely thick as well. A few months later, I saw her recognize a frequent customer, an old British lady, and she immediately switched to perfect English and a seemingly natural British accent. I was immediately taken aback. Her ability to easily transition between two completely different cultures and be a natural at both left me in a state of awe. To be able to do that is pretty fascinating.

One of the main reasons, if not the main reason, I wanted to go to Oxford was the difference in educational pedagogy. Oxford and Cambridge center their learning around the tutorial system. Every week or two, you sit down with a professor and discuss a certain topic for an hour. The exact format depends on both the department and professor. For example, computer science tutorials focus on problem sets and explanations of the solutions. In other subjects, e.g. philosophy, students produce essays every week and some professors choose to make that the main point of discussion of the tutorial while others essentially ignore it.

Especially for my philosophy courses, I felt these one-on-one situations and constant productions of essays solidified my understanding of the material much more than the traditional lecture style elsewhere (though Swarthmore, as a liberal arts college, does a really good job at capping class sizes and making them discussion-based). Furthermore, I came to appreciate what the professors emphasized. It is hard to write an essay per class per week. However, the philosophy professors at Oxford don't expect you to write some new original insight every time. Rather, they are almost asking for more of a summary. They want to know that you actually understand the material before you try to build off it. And that makes sense. Philosophy is thousands of years old. Is a twenty year old really going to bring something completely new to the table? While originality is obviously important, I think they recognize there is a limited amount you should expect at the undergraduate level. Rather, actually understand the great philosophers and why their arguments are influential. Unfortunately, the naked pursuit of originality at institutions elsewhere sometimes comes at the expense of misunderstanding the very position you are addressing.

Anyone from the European Union can attend Oxford at a domestic cost (at least before Brexit happens). As a result, Oxford has an incredibly international population. English has become the lingua franca of science (and really academia in general) and thus the top researchers in each country flock to the United States and England. But, only there was it cemented in my head how difficult that must be. Imagine giving a lecture on a complex computer science subject in your second or third language! Just because someone struggles does not mean they do not understand the concept. It would be much easier in their native language. I and so many others are lucky to have grown up in a country where the native language is the dominantly spoken language in research. It is that much more impressive when others are at the same level or higher but have come from other countries and faced heavy language barriers.

Before coming to college, I never thought I could live in a big city. Since then, I have spent summers in Philadelphia and New York City and could consider living there in the future. Before this experience, I never thought I could live outside of the United States. Now, I know I could actually consider living in England and potentially even other countries as well. It's scary when leaning into discomfort. But, I'm happy I got to experiment with such a major life change while in college. It gave me just the right amount of exposure to make doing so in the future a feasible option.


